CHAPTER FOUR
Soon Waiyaki joined again in the daily rhythm of life in the village. He went out to look after 
cattle; organized raids, went out hunting. He joined in the dances for the young boys and 
felt happy. Days came and went; and still it was the same life. His eyes retained a strong 
and resolute look. Some people said that there was something evil in their glitter. But his 
father must have had the same sort of eyes; in a body becoming distorted with wrinkles, his 
eyes remained alive and youthful.
One evening, a few weeks after his second birth, Waiyaki was called by his father, who 
liked holding talks in his thingira, the man’s hut. Waiyaki entered very quietly, because he 
was always uneasy in the presence of his father.
Chege was sitting in his usual place by the pole. Goats and sheep slept together around 
him and a low snore came from them.
“Sit down,” Chege said, and indicated a small, four-legged stool standing legs upward 
near a fat sheep which slept very close to the fireplace. Waiyaki poked the sheep in the ribs 
with the left leg so that he might get a place to sit. The sheep would not move and Waiyaki 
was forced to sit next to it. “Where do you take the cattle tomorrow?”
“The Valley in Nyama!”
“Have you been to the hills deep south of Kameno?” Chege spoke slowly. Except for a 
slight tremor in the voice, it was young and calm.
“No!” Waiyaki answered after a slight pause. He was trying to recall the place. He 
wondered why his father was asking him all this.
“Have you ever heard of the sacred grove?”
“Yes, we hear about it.”
There was another silence. Waiyaki grew restless with curiosity.
“Leave the cattle and goats with your mother, for tomorrow we shall go to the hills.”
Outside it was dark. A few stars lay scattered across the sky. Waiyaki was excited. He felt 
ready to start on the journey there and then. What were they going to do together, what 
were they going to see? It was a secret, a man’s secret. What other hidden things did his 
father hold in his aging body? He wished Chege had told him more, but he would know all, 
everything, tomorrow. It would be a great day. The journey was important. As he ran into 
his mother’s hut and sat down, he felt important and very big.
• • •
Chege and Waiyaki trudged on. The path they followed was unknown to Waiyaki as he had 
never gone that far along Honia river. But he was content to follow his father, who led the 
way through the labyrinth of bush thorns and creeping plants. Waiyaki was often caught in 
the network of plants and thorns, sometimes extricating himself with difficulty.
Nothing stirred. Only the throb and fall of the river accompanied the occasional plash 
and slither of their footfalls. Sometimes Chege would stop and seem to listen. Waiyaki 
stopped too but would hear nothing. Chege would then pour a shower of saliva on to his 
breast in the Gikuyu way of blessing. Waiyaki thought his father was blessing the river.
